well you've all been waiting for it and
you've all been waiting patiently today
we are going to be cutting the through
dovetail joints so this is a rather long
video so I'm going to stop chatting
let's get going
so of course starting with our two blank
bits of timber let's get it closed and
see what tools we need so tools we need
for this joint a marking knife a marking
gauge another marking gauge a square a
selection of chisels hammer a jesus pen
a dovetail saw and some sort of fret saw
coping saw sort of thing and other tools
that you may find useful and you have a
choice between our firstly a sliding
bevel or you could use a dovetail marker
or you could use some sort of dovetail
guide and other options you have our a
ruler to layout the tails or you could
use compass to layout the tails and one
final option you could also use a
crosscut saw for cutting the ends of the
tails off but a dovetail saw will do it
so you don't need that so anyway in
close
let's get these all marked out alright
let's clear all this up ok so what we've
got here is two different thicknesses of
components and I have conveniently done
them out of two different colors so you
can easily see the difference between
them so I've already got my face sides
and face edges marks on these so I know
what orientation they're going to go
together so face side will be out face
I'll be out and the face edges will be
either down or up don't really matter
cause I'll just flip it over either way
so first thing we need to do is mark out
how deep we want these components to
nest into each other so we're going to
be using a marking gauge for that now in
the intro I stated that you needed two
marking gauges and the reason for this
is because these two components are
different thicknesses if they are the
same thickness
you only need one so happy days so I'm
going to set this Veritas one to the
thickness of the ash here which is going
to be our tails the first point I want
to make here is that I have a few
options as to where I set this marking
gauge if I set it so it's flush with the
edge of the timber here it means that
when I put the joint together all the
components again align together
perfectly now this sounds really great
because it means off so you've got less
work later on in terms of planing but
what I like to do is actually set my
marking gauge a tiny tiny bit beyond
the corresponding components so I'll
show you what I mean by this okay so
here's the end of Yosh and there's the
marking gate so like I said if I set it
beyond it not that much I'm just sort of
exaggerating it for now if I set it
beyond it it means that when I assemble
this joint it means that the tails and
the pins are gonna sit proud of each
other and I'll be playing down endgrain
to get them flush if I set this so the
marking gauge doesn't quite reach the
far edge it means that I'm going to be
playing down these long grain surfaces
to get the joint flush now in most cases
it's actually a lot easier to plane down
the end grain to get it flush so what I
tend to do here is leave it overhanging
a bit and you might wanna do this by is
very very small what I tend to do is
overhang the marking gauge drag it back
and then pinch it around the timber so
now if I lock that down and rotate it
round you can see that the wheel isn't
quite resting on the edge it is actually
dipping below that surface a bit but if
I feel that it's a very very very small
amount so that means I'll have n grain
to pair down at the end which like I say
is usually easier in most cases however
it will only be a very very small amount
because this marking gauge is only
overhanging very very small amount so
back to the marking out so the Veritas
marking gauge is set to the width of the
ash here and what I'm going to do is
transfer this marking gauge onto our pin
board now what's worth met with the pin
board is that you only need to mark it
front and back so with marking gauges
this what a lot of my students will
struggle with what you want to be doing
with this is focusing more on pressing
it into the end grain of the timber
rather than pressing down into the
surface just do really light scores to
start with and gradually increase that
pressure you don't need to make them too
deep because if your chisel is sharp it
will locate it in that line even if it
is extremely faint but for the purposes
of this I'm going to do them quite heavy
so you can see what I'm doing so there
it is on the front and I'm gonna do it
on the back as well now in my previous
joint videos I mentioned that you should
mark sholde lines with a square but with
dovetails I always do them with a
marking gauge this because I always make
sure that that end grain is perfectly
square whether that's been cut off a
panel saw or if it's been cut off a
shooting board the squareness this is
extremely accurate therefore I can
warrant referencing off it to mark my
shoulder lines the other reason in all
honesty is because my largest square
that sort of reaches over this distance
isn't actually that square so I can't
rely on it and things like this so and
I'll use a marking gauge with dovetails
but anyway there you go shoulder line
mark front
marks back you don't need to do the
sides on the pins so we're going to do
exactly the same for the tails now so
I'm going to get my type mark mark
engaged now if you want to know the
difference between these two marking
gauges I did a tall jewel between them
they're very similar but there are some
differences that you should be aware of
the link is up in the top right corner
so did I set this marking gauge exactly
as I did with the Veritas one so leave
it overhanging a tiny tiny amount right
there you go lock it down and I'm going
to transfer this onto the tail side so
I'm just gonna make sure he's going
together the right way yep
so what it's gone to here so these again
press really hard into the end grain
here and just do light pressure to start
with get that line established because a
lot of people with dovetails the thing
they really struggle with is getting
this shoulder line crisp this is usually
where you'll see all of the gaps of
beginners because they haven't taken the
time to mark this accurately so front
back light pressure to start with
gradually increase that pressure now on
the back here what I want you to do is
dig the mark engaging quite a bit more
than the front still keep it nice and
accurate still keep the pressure on the
end grain but make this line a little
bit deeper than what you would on the
other ones so then we're just going to
do the sides quickly okay where we get
shoulder lines are all marked out so the
next thing we can do is start marking
out the tail spacing so to the vise okay
so to lay out the spacing the tails as I
said at the start you have a couple of
options to this on the end of this we're
going to put three - yeah three tails on
the end of that I reckon so obvious
option is a ruler say you marking I
don't know five millimeters from each
side or just under a quarter of an inch
marking five mil and then work out your
spacing at the dovetails between that so
a ruler works pretty well for that
especially if you're working to a
drawing for example however if you're
not working to a drawing and you can't
be bothered to do some basic maths which
is me in a lot of cases nowadays you can
use some dividers for it so I'm going to
show you that method now firstly what
you want to do is work out the size of
the half pins either side of the tails
so like I said with the ruler measuring
in five millimeters we can do exactly
the same with these so make it about
five mil that looks about right that's
what we're going to do is get the
compass
on the corner like that and then bring
the other point down and stab it in give
us a little point to work to so I'll
just draw that one so you can see it got
a little point around there we're gonna
do exactly the same from the other side
to get them to find a right on the
corner like that and bring the other one
down stab it in place then we got a mark
there as well now this the bit I like
what we're going to do is just sort of
guess the size of the tails this way
you're taking out the mathematics aspect
of it happy days so they never be that
big baby so what we're gonna do is start
the from the dividers in that first
point there what will you answer today
we're not going to stab this other one
in we're just gonna walk it along so pop
it in that point and then we're going to
walk it along hopefully three times one
two I've completely overdone that that's
rubbish right let's start again all
right one two three right so that hasn't
quite reached that other point so what
we're aiming to do here is actually for
that to overstep it so I'm gonna open up
a little bit more now obviously whatever
that distance is that I was short by so
in this case about five millimeters I'm
doing three steps so whatever change I
make to these dividers it's going to be
multiplied by three so I don't really
need to do it by that much maybe about a
mil or two so there you go start again
one two three there you go so now you
see it's landed spotting in there and
what this means is when we come to mark
out our dovetails we would get a spacing
that looks similar to this dovetail
guide I got from Berner Bill's burry
when I was on the anarchist tool chest
course you see it's literally the width
of a saw cut between the tails
some people like doing this because it
shows that the dovetails were truly hand
cut because you cannot do that with a
router bit imagine a shank that big that
would just be terrifying but yeah shows
that the joint is completely hand cut
and that there is no machines involved
with it I think it looks good in this
case but it's not usually an aesthetic
that I'd go for so I like to leave about
three or four mil between my tails so
because I was spot-on with that other
one are you open these by about a
millimeter or so and then by the time
I've walked three times it's going to
multiply that by three and I should
overstep this by about three millimeters
now so one two three oh yeah I like that
so whatever this oversteps it by that is
going to be the distance between your
tails that looks pretty good to me so
I'm going to start again and this time
I'm going to dig the compasses
in a little bit so one dig it in spin it
round to dig it in and three don't dig
it in there what you want to do is reset
the compass to this one and go back the
other way so one two as you can see we
got a mark there
there there there and if I now square
these across you can see that we've got
our five millimeter spacing on the side
we've got three tails and these bits in
between are our waste so that's the
method I tend to go for nowadays because
like I say it means no maths which I
really like
however if I'm working specifically to a
drawing I will still use a ruler so next
thing to do is Mark out the angles on
there so it's Mark out these dovetail
angles this is where you have one of
three choices firstly you could buy
yourself obviously a dovetail guide so
these are a fixed angle you just trace
around that and you can actually do that
across the endgrain as well and
obviously this is quite a quick method
another option here is to use some sort
of dovetail guide and not even bother
marking out the tails here you can just
plot that on top shelf you saw up
against it and these magnets will guide
your saw all the way through I'll be
showing you this in use later on this is
the cat's Moses dovetail guide I had to
play around with it earlier and I very
much liked it so I'll be showing you
that later the other option is using a
sliding bevel so this is kind of like an
adjustable square you can simply unlock
it choose the angle you want and then
mark down for the end grain like that
the question is what angle do you look
that well I will show you that now so if
those lines all squared across the top
the next thing we need to do now is
obviously draw dovetails on the front
here and we do this using ratios so for
the purpose of this demonstration I'm
going to do a one-in-six so firstly what
going to do is pop a small mark on the
bottom of this MDF here not drawing it
on my bench don't worry so a small mark
on the MDF and we're going to mark one
unit across from that so I'm going to do
both metric and imperial here I'm going
to do 25 millimeters across which is
also one inch and then what I'm going to
do is get a square on the edge get my
ruler and then I'm just going to square
that line all the way up like this so
for a one-in-six ratio we have gone one
inch across now we just need to go six
inches up so six inches is also 150
millimetres conveniently the length of
this bit of MDF and we can join them up
like that and
we now have a 1 in 6 ratio so this is
exactly the same if you do 1 meter
across and 6 meters up one mile across 6
miles up it's going to give you exactly
the same ratio don't we need to do is
get our sliding bevel hooked over the
edge of the MDF and line it up with that
ratio lock it down and there we go one
in 6 ratio locked into our sliding bevel
so that works exactly the same if it's 1
in 8 1 in 7 1 in 5 1 in 4 whatever you
want to do just measure one unit across
and whatever you want up as long as
you're using the same units of
measurement and now with our one in
sixth of tail ratio locked in we can
simply join those lines up with the
lines on the endgrain
my Jesus Pen has started running out
guys I need to get a new one I'm sorry
I'm using a pencil for this now just
take your time with this the marking out
is arguably the most important bit of
dovetailing because there's no point
working accurately to inaccurate lines
because obviously that's still going to
be inaccurate what I'm gonna do now is
just mark the waste I know what size of
those lines I'm actually going to be
cutting out again it's very easy to do
especially as a beginner or someone with
my level experience if I'm doing loads
of draws for example it's still very
easy to cut out the wrong line
speaking of let's get cutting these out
so to cut these out you could do exactly
as I said in my video how to saw the
link is up here for that watching that
you'll get some great tips for cutting
these dovetails so what I'm going to do
is start on the back edge just nibble
away at that line I've got my saw
already angle to match the angle at the
dovetail I've blown away the waste as
it's created
[Music]
and then that line is perfectly
established square across the timber and
then once I've done that I can just
continue it on down to the baseline no
say at this point don't cut through the
baseline because again it's what a lot
of beginners do they think I'm cutting a
dovetail they get completely carried
away and then they cut below that
shoulder line and you get a nice I'll
gap there so don't do that
it's not great obviously just get as
close as you dare that looks pretty good
to me so you could do that all the way
along I would suggest working on the
right hand side the tails and then the
left hand side the tails or vice versa
just do all the same side and then all
of the opposite sides in one go so then
you'll start reinforcing your muscle
memory okay so before going any further
with cutting the tails on these I wanted
to highlight the use of dovetail guides
now I've got two here these were sent to
me by Jonathan Katz Moses of Katz Moses
woodworking and what these will do is
really help you with the soaring with
dovetailing
now how do they do this you might ask
well they are magnetic now these are
made from solid urethane which is the
same material they make pull balls from
so I would tap up my workbench to sort
of show that but I'm worried it might
dent it quite considerably so yeah these
are pretty hard wearing bits of kit
they're also clear so when you put them
on the top of your component you can
still see if you're cutting on the right
side of the line because like I said
earlier it's very easy not to do that so
I'm gonna show you these in use I will
be doing a tool duel between these
dovetail guides and the David baron
dovetail guide in the near future so if
that's available the link will be up
here if not I've just done some weird
wavy stuff with my hand that doesn't
link to anything be anyway let's see
these in use so this guide I've got four
phases I can reference on I'm using the
tails here at the moment so you might be
I'll see that there so that just goes on
like that I'm gonna put it up against
the pencil line that I've got on the
endgrain I'm going to use a Japanese saw
for this because that's generally what
works better and then once it's all
locked in place just pull back and watch
this follow the line all the way down
completely accurately
one laugh so that has tracked it down
perfectly I'll do another one here so
guys right up against that line pop the
saw on and then just start K you see how
solidly along the top here that this saw
is locked into me it's not budging side
to side
whatsoever you do need to put a little
bit of effort in in your part but the
guide really does help with this now you
gotta do flip the guide rounds and go
from the other side now the camera is in
the way now so M move so before going
any further with this I wanted to stress
the importance of how important it is
that these are cut perfectly square
across the an grain the angle down the
front here if the dovetails isn't
actually that important that's mainly
there for aesthetics however if these
are not square it means that when you
come to put the corresponding pin board
into that if these tails will wedge
shape for example it would mean that it
would split the pin board below the
shoulder line so not ideal obviously
similarly if it was wedged this way
obviously you're going to get some
horrible gaps down the front here so
really really important that these are
square across the endgrain so like I
said you've got a couple of options that
you'd have to do it the way I showed you
my video how to saw correctly put in the
time effort and practice and you'll
eventually be able to get that perfectly
square or grab yourself some sort of
magnetic dovetail guide like this
they're not only good at giving you
repeatable results down the front here
but more importantly for giving you a
square cut across the end grain and
another instance to use dovetail guides
is if you perhaps dovetailing a really
nice component or a nice bit of timber
for example that you couldn't afford to
mess up having one of these would be
like your insurance I suppose means that
you're less likely to get something
wrong with it obviously so anyway now
let's get clearing this waste out so for
clearing out the waste between these
dovetails I'm going to use the new
concepts fret saw some people will tell
you to chisel in from both sides and
just hack that waste out I have no idea
why people do that it takes so long
it absolutely mushes the end grain
between the joints I really struggled to
see a reason for it but people do it so
each their own but this is the method I
use so the advantage of the fret saw
over a coping saw is that the blade is
thins are able to get it down really
fine cuts like this where as a coping
saw blade is generally a lot thicker and
it's difficult to get down saw cuts like
this so because it's so thin I can
actually put it down just do a couple of
drags back and forth and I'll be able to
turn it so it's not removed now I can
just flip it round and take that other
bit get this close to the baseline as
you dare here about a millimeter or so
we'll do that done so now let's cut
these ends off so with the tails we put
the marking gauge around all four sides
so I've got a little line here that I
can work to the cat's emergence dovetail
guide also has a shoulder section which
is on the opposite side to the dovetail
section so I can literally put that on
there put my sore against it and just
start cutting down now with these
shoulders I like to chisel them down at
the end I don't like to leave them off
the saw because it's an ingrained joint
and I don't really like that being
fluffy so I'll show you how you can do
that this guide just simply put it up to
that line overhang it by one millimeter
soar up to it and just start cutting
down
then you can start bending your sore
here to see if you can ping that last
bit wait for it wait for it yeah there
we go
now if you're looking close there you
can see it is about a millimeter off
from the shoulder line which makes
cleanup a lot easier later on so like so
start you also have the option to use a
crosscut saw with this and this is where
you would use it because we're cutting
across the grain here so if you were to
do this freehand start on the back edge
nibble away the back levy out the saw
and then take it down to that cut line
you can easily ping this last bit of
material a little bit better with the
Veritas there we go we're cut about a
millimeter away from that shoulder line
so again putting the time effort and
work and you'll be able to do that like
I just did freehand with the saw if not
grab yourself one of the dovetail guides
and just do it with the shoulder section
on that so next what we're going to do
is chisel down to our base lines so when
chiseling out these tails there are
obviously a few methods of doing it you
can clamp it up right in the voice and
go through like that or alternatively
you could have it flat on the surface
and go down like this now the last way
is generally my choice with it I'm going
to show you how I go about that now so
cockadooters clamp this between my dog's
here you notice how I'm clamping it with
the tails off to the right or the left
either way the most important thing here
is that I'm slightly down the base line
on this along its length that way when
it comes to chiseling down to that base
line I can see if that chisel is going
in square or under cutting or over
cutting virtually you can see if it's
going in square whereas if timber was
plant towards you like this you can't
really see the angle of that chisel very
easily so I would recommend clamping it
sideways like this and this the same
reason why I don't it upright in a vise
like that you can't really see the angle
that you chisels going in also if you
were chiseling down to that base line
using a mallet you lose a lot of energy
transfer because that is slightly
deflecting in the vise whereas if you
have it down on a solid work bench all
of the energy is transferred into the
work bench and you lose a lot less power
so let's get chiseling it down so I'm in
close so as I said at the start this is
usually where beginners will make an
absolute dogs dinner of their dovetails
getting this shoulder line right is
usually the difference between if your
dovetail looks
or if it looks like hobos 2 front teeth
or 3 front teeth in this case so what
you want to do get the widest chisel
that you can possibly fit between those
dovetails so this one's right on the
limit I'm not entirely sure I want to go
with that I'm gonna drop it to my
quarter inch and do it in two steps
because the corner of the bevel edge
here it can possibly bruise the internal
corner of the tails
if the chisel is slightly too big to fit
in that cavity so usually best to do it
in two chops or so the other thing to
look at here is if your saw cut has gone
all the way to the base line if it
hasn't just reference your chisel off
that inside face and then just simply
roll it up until your chisel hits the
base line or just goes a tiny bit beyond
it and this means that those internal
corners in there will be really crisp
once the joint is all assembled together
so there we go now we can start chopping
now what I've got here is about two
millimeters of material between the
shoulder line and where I cut with my
fret saw and what you don't want to be
doing here is pumping your chisel
straight into that line and whacking
down to it because what will happen is
the wedging action the chisel is going
to push the chisel back and it's gonna
fall below the shoulder line and give
you a gap once the joint is assembled so
this is usually what beginners do
they'll put it in there whack it through
and then wonder why they're always
getting a horrible joint between the
shoulder line there it's because you're
trying to take off too much at once so
what I generally advise here is keep
holding the material until you can't
have it any more so we've got about two
millimeters left I'm gonna have that
material and leave it so we have about
one millimeter left get the chisel in
there so it's looking pretty square and
till about halfway and then just do the
other side now we've got a millimeter
left I reckon we can have that again
take it down to a half a millimeter
again only tapping it through to halfway
and just do this second bit now and now
we're about half a millimeter away from
that line so if I try and half that
again it's probably just gonna crumble
so I usually say half a millimeter is
about as close you need to get and now
chisel into that shoulder line that we
scratched on with the marking gauge get
the chisel square and what I'm gonna do
here is do
taps and I'm gonna slightly undercut
this now and you'll see the benefit of
that later but what I'm going to do is
after those two initial taps I'm simply
going to angle the chisel out a tiny bit
and put a small dip in the end grain at
the end of the day an undercut is an
undercut you don't need to start tilting
the chisel all the way over like this it
just needs to be like half a degree or
one degree or so that is enough so two
taps in straight slightly undercut
halfway
I'm going to do exactly the same here
for this of a bit 1/2 inch square slight
undercut there we go so now we'll do the
same for this component got about 2
millimeters left so smack it through
halfway now chisel in the base line to
tap straight slight undercut halfway
then there we go that's how you get a
nice crisp sholde line between the tails
and so now once you've done that side
simply flip it over and do exactly the
same on the opposite side so again if
the saw hasn't quite reached the base
line just get your chisel in there roll
it up hit the base line and then start
hacking out with materials to take away
halfway halfway and then once you're
about half a millimeter away from the
base line
chiseling the shoulder line do a few
taps square like that and then slightly
undercut it to match the opposite side
then we go it will through on both sides
so now what we got to do is focus on
these outer corners so back to the vise
so these outer part the tails is where
you've got to be very very careful
because on these internal ones you only
really see one of the faces you have got
two sides to it but generally this is
the inside of the draw if you look
inside the draw you'll be able to see
any gaps here but in most cases you'll
be looking at the gaps on the outside so
beyond these ones on the face idea
however on the edges here if we don't
cut these correctly you'll be able to
see a gap on the front and you'll be
able to see a gap on the top and in most
cases you'll be able to see a gap on the
inside as well so you've got three faces
here that you need to pay attention to
as opposed to the two in the middle so
you've got a few different ways of doing
this you could clamp it up right in the
vise like this and then you get a chisel
in from either side angle your chisel
down and pair upwards from all three
sides and then that will create a small
peak in the middle here and then you can
simply come in from the side and pair
that peak down until you get to the
shoulder and all three sides the way I
like to do it is get it in the vise
sideways like this and then simply get
my chisel into the shoulder line here
and then hammer it down following this
line on the front I find that I get much
better results from that so if you get
in close you can watch me do that so
same as before we don't want to be
smashing straight as that shoulder line
like an absolute barbarian we want to
have the material if we can so I left
about a millimeter off from the saw I'm
gonna have it and take it to about a
half a millimeter away from the line so
get it in there a few times yep so I
still preserved the shoulder line at the
top here and now I've taken away that
tiny bit of material it means that my
chisel has less chance of being pushed
back into the shoulder so in the
shoulder line like that and now you
can't see it but I'm down on one knee
and I'm really focusing on that show
line down the front there
there you go so that's taking it off
nicely now I can just come in from the
opposite way and remove that little
nibbly bit there so it's coming from the
front side and remove those little bits
in the corner and there we go we've got
a nice crisp line and obviously I
started it in the shoulder line here so
I know that's accurate and I followed it
all the way down and if I look on the
shoulder line here I can see that there
is a really really thin white line all
the way around and that is left over
from my marking gauge like that it marks
the shoulders with initially and so now
while it's upright and the vise just use
this opportunity to get any sort of
horrible fluffy bits out the corners
because that's going to stop your joint
from going together as well being
careful not to damage the internal
corners of these tails this is the
closest thing to surgery you will ever
get if you're not a surgeon already that
is then yeah you're probably pretty
close to surgery by that point but
anyway I'm chatting complete rubbish
aren't I so there we go that is most the
fluff removed another thing I like to do
is just get my knife in there and just
score into the corners a few times and
that will get rid of most the remaining
debris and there we go I reckon we're
ready to mark this onto a pin board now
so let's get that set up so you might
remember at the start of this video when
we were marking the shoulder lines on
here I said to make the back shoulder
line on the tails a little bit heavier
and this is why what I'm going to do is
get a chisel and I'm going to start
about three millimeters back from that
shoulder line I'm going to angle the
chisel up and I'm going to slowly wiggle
it in and take out the v-groove until it
hits that shoulder line you'll get a
nice little click and then you can
remove that material I'll do exactly the
same on the back of this tail as well
choke up on the chisel when you're doing
this if you're holding it by hand so
then you're not gonna slip and make your
hand look like a ham sandwich so and
finally on the back of here and do make
sure you are doing this on the back of
the tails not the front because this
will absolutely ruin your work otherwise
and so now what we can do is we can get
our pin board and our tail board
oversleeps and face eyes and face hedges
go in the same way get a pin board
clamped in the vise and get away bit of
material supporting it from behind and
what you might be tense do is get this
material the same height as this
pinboard don't do that leave this
pinboard about a millimeter or two above
that lock it in place slide this back
and then this is what the little V
groove will do if I slide it forward you
might be able to hear that that V groove
is allowing this tail block to lock
itself in place exactly on that shoulder
line it's only a very very small amount
of location but it's enough to hold it
in there and to let you know that you're
holding these tails in the correct place
so get that located on there the next
thing you can do is get a wide chisel
reference it off your face side and face
edge and then slide that block up and
then you have two points of location
it's not only gonna meet up perfectly on
the internal shoulder lines here but
it's also going to be flush on the face
side and the face edge which is always
good so there we go I've got that flush
and now all I'm gonna do is get a
marking knife and very very carefully
mark around these tails now same as with
the marking gauges do a light cut to
start with and then gradually increase
the pressure do not let this tail board
move because that will mean that these
knife lines are inaccurate in some ways
the methods that I just showed you to
locate the tails onto the pin board by
cutting the V groove and by lining it up
on the face edge will help you align it
again but it's never gonna be spot on
it's always best to be able to do it in
one operation but we'll make mistakes
sometimes so if it slips just go through
exact same process as I just did so
there we go
I've got an exact template of the tails
on here marks on the ends my pin balls
so now I can simply move that up and
square those lines down the front so I
can easily see them I must say I am very
much missing Jesus this pencil isn't
quite doing it for me so we go there all
squared down and of course before you do
anything mark your waist because now if
you cut the wrong side of the lines
you're gonna have to start this pin
board again and this is some lovely
walnut so I don't really want to put
that to waste so scribble across the
front scribble across the end grain and
hopefully I'm not going to cut the wrong
side the lines now so to cut these out
I'm going to show you a few different
methods as well if you use the cat's
modus dovetail guide mostly the slope of
this section here is able to cut your
tails however what you can also do with
it
is cut the pins because this stem on the
bottom here is a dovetail shape as you
can see here six to one which is what
I've cut these dovetails too so I can
either put that on here
to cut the right-hand side or I can flip
it round and that will do the left-hand
side now with these tails if you
remember it was this one here that a cut
freehand so if I translate that onto
here this line here it wasn't cut with
the cat's modes of stuff they'll go so I
won't be able to use that as a reference
on here because my soaring won't be
exactly the same as this guide however
for all five of these other ones I can
use the guide but for the purposes of
this I'm just going to use it for this
middle death sale and cut out both walls
of that and we'll see what sort of
result we get so here we go start with
this line closest to me thumb on the
back edge get it located blow away the
waste as it's created now I mentioned
how important it is that the end grain
on the tails is perfectly square it's
also important that these are cut down
perfectly square as well because
similarly with the tails
if the pin sockets are wedge-shaped when
I go to smash these in even if these are
square it's still going to wedge it
apart so the pins are the hard a bit
because you've got to get this line
along the top spot on and you've got to
get this line down the front spot on as
well so again watch my video on how to
saw and that will give you a few tips on
how to go about that so I'll just
continue on with what I was doing okay
and katsumoto's go for the middle one so
get it matched up on there I'm going to
stick the sorter at first I'm going to
slide that up to the line ups going to
take a small needle out the back to
check where I'm at with it I think we
can get a little bit closer than that so
hold it in place and let the jig do the
work
now flip it over and do the other side
it's worth saying this jig that you
don't need to use it with the Japanese
saw bit in most cases with dovetail
guides using a Japanese saw like this is
much easier
same as before get in there with your
fret saw and just hack out this waste
here that's worth mentioning that be
sure to angle your saw to match the
angle of the pin here it's quite easy to
keep it straight and start cutting into
the back edge of that so just be aware
of that okay let's get chiseling so same
thing as before here widest chisel that
you can fit between the gaps without
hitting either of those edges and keep
having the material before you commit to
that final shoulder line don't go in and
just completely whack it because it's
gonna look terrible so again about two
millimeters left take it down to one mil
obviously again I'm sighting down this
line here so I can see if much it will
just stand on the pins oh so I can see
if my chisel is tilting forwards or
backwards or undercutting or overcutting
whatever it is
and if you work in from the face side on
this component just be aware that you
are tripping it into a wedge-shaped
cavity so try and keep that chisel
central in the socket for now to avoid
damaging the internal walls of these
pins we can clean that up later and
advise zones gonna keep this central so
we're in the show line now one two taps
slight undercut so halfway
all right so that sides all done let's
just flip it over so on the back here I
can see that the saw hasn't quite hit
the shoulder line so I'm just gonna roll
the chisel up and complete that I just
want to do this for insurance purposes
right so we chop down to the short lines
let's get it up in the vise now and
clean out the corners so this was what I
meant about chiseling into a wedge
cavity cuz obviously as I was going down
my chisel fits in perfectly there but as
it gets to the back edge it's not able
to fit all the way through so if I try
to whack it too much then I'll see it's
just going to damage these internal pins
so get a smaller chisel upright in the
vise and finish off these internal
corners upright like this doesn't need a
lot of work
there you go I think that's the front
all done let's just flip it around okay
again it's looking pretty good so now
I'm just gonna get a knife into the
corners and make sure there's no fluffy
bits in there that's gonna stop it from
bottoming out
so before whacking this together as
tempting as it is do a few checks
beforehand to make sure that that is
actually a sensible idea the main one
you want to be doing is checking that
the shoulder lines are square or are
slightly undercut so what I'm gonna do
is get a square in there and check that
it's hitting both the front and the back
baseline and this is where the undercut
that we did will become prominent the
outer shoulder lines of this joint will
touch the square however the middle or
not and the reason we do the undercut is
so it prevents a little peak from being
formed in between the shoulder lines and
stopping this square from bottoming out
in there once the joint is assembled
that undercut will never ever be seen so
it doesn't really matter but like so you
don't have to go completely over the top
of the undercut just a degree or half a
degree whatever will do will suffice
whatever the tails are all good I'm just
gonna check the pins as well that's good
there
that's good good good good good
so now just check for any fluffy bits in
the corners again because once you get
these under the lights quite easy for
you to see them so just get rid of
everything you can see in there and try
and make it as clean as possible so as
you can see I like to do this in one
marking knife and kind of just pick it
out and same in here as well just look
okay so that looks good the next thing
we're gonna do is put a small leading
edge on the back of all these tails so
get in close it so we're gonna do here
on the back of the tail so this the face
side being the front on the back is put
the leading edge and all that is is just
a small chamfer on the back of each tail
which is going to help it locate in the
pin socket now what you don't want to do
is start the sham foot all the way from
the end green because that is gonna show
on the finished joint instead start
about five millimeters or just under a
quarter of an inch and just put a small
chamfer on the back like that really
doesn't have to be that big just
something to help these tails locate in
the pins and also if we have any rubbish
in the corner of the pins this chamfer
will bridge the gap over that so
eliminate another possibility of the
tails not bottoming out in there so just
referencing the chisel off the shoulder
line
take off the little ears that have been
left over there we go so I'm just
noticed here on the second pin in from
the right that I haven't got as close to
the line as I wanted to when soaring I
think I could probably do with pairing
it back a little bit so what it's
tempting to do here is pop your chisel
in the end grain and smash it through
but what that's going to do is to track
the grain down the front here and you
don't know if you're going to get that
perfect square or not
so as tempting as it is your best bet is
to go in from the front now I generally
lower the chisel like this press in with
my thumb on the opposite side and they
just roll it up to hit that line along
the top and then pair through from the
sides it's being really controlled with
it while I'm here there's its hiney bit
at the back here that probably would
have compressed but I don't want to risk
it splitting because when you hammer
these together these parts here are at
most risk of splitting so these outer
ones you want to be pretty precise with
okay has this three hours of filming be
worth it they're locating in there to
start with which is a good start that's
the little shampoo that we just put on
the back edge and it shows that our
tails are a pretty good fit obviously so
let's start tapping it down
well it's me that looks pretty good so
let's clean it up and see what we got
[Music]
and there we go guys that is how you cut
a dovetail joint entirely by hand with
no machines whatsoever so if you haven't
already be sure to check out the Katz
Moses dovetail guide I'll put a link in
the description maybe a card up here as
well if I'm feeling generous ever have
enough left something like this would be
great for beginners who are really
struggling with soaring for example I
mean the result I've got on this middle
tail here is brilliant there is
absolutely nothing wrong with it the
angles on the perfect and it was very
easy to do as well so the link for that
is in the description I will also be
doing a video covering the extra
features this little guide has as well
so keep an eye out for that but why I
always say with dovetailing guys is mark
out precisely take your time with it if
he saw rings off it really doesn't
matter just chisel back to those lines
and trust that those lines are right if
you take the time to mark them
accurately they will be right if you
mark them wrong then there's no point
working to them accurately because
honestly you're just gonna get gaps
everywhere so take your time with the
marking out work back to those lines and
you'll get a lovely joint like this no
glue as well so there we go
I hope you found that useful of see
traffic comments below if you have any
further questions I'm sure there's going
to be a lot in this topic and yeah I
will see you in the next video
[Music]